My MacBook Aged Three Years in Three Months of Vibe Coding
​
 Summarize
​
I thought agentic coding had damaged my SSD. The drive was healthy. The software around it was not.

Luis Ticas

Image generated by Gemini
I did not start vibe coding three months ago. I’ve been coding with AI since the first generation of tools made this workflow possible: autocomplete, then chat, then short assisted sessions. Last year, vibe coding was manageable. What changed this year was the intensity. Fable, Claude’s model built for ultrawork mode, could spin up to 50 agents at once.

Short prompts became autonomous agents running for hours, with “loops” being one of the top trending searches. One open repository became several. The IDE stopped suggesting code and started scaffolding applications, reading entire codebases, installing dependencies, running tests, failing, retrying, and quietly preserving the state of every step it took.

I assumed my machine could absorb it. It’s a modern Mac, and I was mostly typing English sentences into an IDE.

I was wrong, but not in the way I expected.

Looking for the cleanup steps? Skip to “What I changed” below.

The machine started behaving differently

The degradation wasn’t dramatic. It was cumulative.

The machine ran hotter than it used to. Beachballs appeared during tasks that had never produced one. Disk-full warnings arrived on a drive I hadn’t consciously filled, and returned after I cleared space. Agent sessions crashed mid-run and took an hour of context with them.

Nothing in my visible workload explained it. By month three, the laptop felt like it had aged three years.

Anyone running agents across multiple repositories may recognize these symptoms. And if you’ve read the same threads I have, you may have jumped to the same theory I did.

I thought the SSD was dying


Image taken from Reddit
There’s a claim circulating in developer circles: heavy vibe coding is killing MacBooks within three months. Worn-out SSDs. And because Apple Silicon storage is soldered to the logic board, a dead drive is a dead laptop.

The theory was reasonable. Agentic sessions generate enormous disk activity, flash memory has finite erase-write cycles, and my machine was visibly struggling. So before trusting anyone’s screenshots, including the scary ones, I decided to check my own machine first.

That decision changed the article you’re reading.

I thought the machine was wearing out. It was filling up.

What I found on my own Mac

My machine

MacBook Pro, Apple M3 · 16 GB unified memory · 512 GB SSD (Apple AP0512Z, about 460 GB usable as the data volume)
macOS 26.5.1 · Cursor 3.6.31 + Claude Code, agent sessions most working days
Free storage when I started measuring: 41 GB of 460 GB usable, about 9%
Swap: macOS reported 24.8 GB of swap in use
Cursor-related processes running: 29, the oldest alive for 27 days
Cursor state on disk: 932 MB in Application Support (state.vscdb at 286 MB, plus a 17 MB backup) and 7.6 GB in ~/.cursor
Claude state on disk: 8.7 GB in Application Support and 1.5 GB in ~/.claude
Lifetime data written (SMART): 54.0 TB in 755 power-on hours
SMART Percentage Used: 2% · zero media errors · health: PASSED
This is the code I used to see my SMART data

sudo smartctl -a /dev/disk0

Screenshot of my terminal
Three numbers in that box stopped me.

The first was swap: 24.8 GB in use on a 16 GB machine. Every gigabyte of that overflow lives on the SSD, written and rewritten as the kernel juggles memory it doesn’t have. The machine wasn’t old. It was spending the day pretending it had more RAM than it did.

The second was the process list. With my usual scatter of opened-and-closed projects behind me, 29 Cursor-related processes were still active, and the oldest had been alive for 27 days. I close windows with the red button like everyone else; whatever I thought was ending, process trees had persisted underneath for weeks. Electron apps legitimately keep helpers running, so this alone doesn’t prove a leak. But it closely matched the ghost-process pattern in the public report I’ll get to below, even though I didn’t reproduce its exact 4.16 GB-per-window signature.

The third was headroom: 41 GB free, about 9%, below the floor where macOS and the SSD controller start struggling to do their jobs.

Here’s what I didn’t find, and it matters: the monster from the forums. My state.vscdb was 286 MB, not 20 GB. My snapshot folder wasn’t full of gigabyte pack files. My agentic tooling had a real footprint, nearly 19 GB across Cursor’s and Claude’s directories combined, but the biggest hogs on my drive were 83 GB of Xcode data and almost 30 GB of ordinary caches, which have nothing to do with AI. Agentic tooling was part of the problem, not the largest consumer of storage. The AI-specific issue was never total bytes. It was the combination of long-lived processes, extreme swap, hidden state, and missing lifecycle controls.

If you want the one-line version of the check, the directory sizes take one command:

du -sh ~/Library/Application\ Support/Cursor ~/.cursor ~/.claude
It reads sizes and changes nothing. Swap is sysctl vm.swapusage; the process list is Activity Monitor, sorted by name.

And then the SMART data, the drive’s own lifetime wear accounting, delivered the turn this article is built on. My drive has absorbed 54 terabytes of writes in 755 power-on hours. That’s an enormous number for a young machine. A swapfile under heavy sustained pressure is almost certainly one contributor, though SMART can’t tell me which applications produced each write, and 755 hours of builds, installs, indexing, and updates all left their share.

The rumor got the writes right. It got the consequence wrong. Percentage Used: 2%. Available spare: 100%. Media errors: zero. Fifty-four terabytes of punishment, and the drive has barely noticed.

So the picture was forming: heavy swap traffic and long-lived processes explained my symptoms without requiring a dying drive, and the drive itself confirmed it wasn’t dying. But to understand where the extreme cases come from, the ones my machine hadn’t reproduced, I went to the public bug trackers and found the failure modes documented in detail on other people’s machines.

Four ways agentic IDEs lose control of local state

A note on evidence before we start: what follows mixes what I observed on my own machine, what users have documented publicly with measurements, and what the vendor has acknowledged. I’ll label which is which. A forum screenshot and a reproduced behavior are not the same kind of proof, and none of these reports proves that every installation behaves this way. They prove the failure modes exist.

Closed windows that don’t actually close


Screenshot of LinkedIn
One Cursor user documented a strange pattern: closing a project with the red macOS button removes the window, but not the memory behind it.

In “the bug report”, each closed instance climbed to roughly 4.16 GB and stayed. After moving between several repositories, the user recorded 28 GB of swap. A separate report describes the editor reaching “50 GB of memory overnight” with no agent running at all.

The problem is not that the IDE uses a lot of memory while working. It’s that the memory keeps growing after the visible window is gone. On a Mac with 8 or 16 GB of unified memory, the overflow has exactly one place to go: the SSD, as swap.

A chat database that never forgets

Cursor stores agent and chat state in a global SQLite database called state.vscdb. Users have documented it “growing by roughly a gigabyte per day”.

One user went beyond screenshots and decoded the contents: over 225,000 rows of chat bubbles, agent blobs, and checkpoints, months of conversations and agent state with no expiration or cleanup mechanism. The vendor acknowledged the problem in the same thread: Cursor staff said multi-gigabyte databases are not normal, and the recommended workaround was to quit the app and delete the files by hand.

Another user found the database and its automatic backup at “roughly 20 GB each, on a 256 GB Mac”. More than 15% of the machine was consumed by chat history he didn’t know existed.

This wasn’t some tiny preferences file. It was an archive nobody had been asked to manage.

Snapshots that come back when you delete them

The IDE’s local indexing engine writes .pack snapshot files into a hidden directory. One user counted “378 of them, 72 over a gigabyte each”.

Deleting them doesn’t stick. Users report the files “regenerating the moment the app relaunches”, and a related report shows the indexing helper “writing 30+ GB automatically on launch”, before the user types anything.

Deleting them felt productive. Watching them return did not.

Because the files are continuously created and destroyed, free space can look stable while enormous write volume passes through the drive unseen. I infer this churn is a major source of the terrifying daily write counters people screenshot: high logical write volume that never shows up as missing space.

Write storms severe enough that macOS intervened

In one “diagnostic-backed report”, Cursor’s SQLite module wrote 2.14 GB in about nine minutes, hard enough that macOS throttled and killed the process. A text editor should not need the operating system to stage an intervention. One diagnostic-backed report doesn’t establish a widespread pattern; it does show the failure mode can become severe enough for the OS to step in.

One fairness note before moving on. Agentic IDEs are not the only software hoarding local state. Docker volumes, node_modules, Xcode derived data, and package caches all leave debris, and my own audit proved it: the largest single consumer on my drive was Xcode, not any AI tool.

What sets this pattern apart in the reports is the rate of growth, the absence of visible controls, and state that regenerates after deletion. What set it apart on my machine was memory that outlived its windows by weeks and a swap load a 16 GB machine was never meant to carry.

The SSD had a different story


Image generated by Gemini
Howard Oakley, who has measured Mac SSD behavior for years, “puts conservative endurance estimates at around 3,000 erase-write cycles” for recent Apple internal drives, and expects the real figure is often higher.

The field data backs him up. In his comment section, a five-year-old 8 GB M1 MacBook Air that swaps regularly has written 136 TB, with the controller reporting just 10% of its life consumed. In a deliberate torture test, one researcher pushed 4,500 TB of writes through a Mac mini M1’s SSD. It kept working.

My own drive is now a data point in that set: 54 TB written, 2% consumed. Taking the reported 2% at face value implies an endurance scale of roughly 2,700 TB; SMART percentages may be rounded, so treat that as directional rather than a precise forecast.

Directionally is all we need. Even the theoretical worst-case arithmetic agrees: these are estimates that don’t map perfectly onto host writes because of write amplification and over-provisioning, but a 512 GB drive at a conservative 3,000 cycles gives roughly 1,500 TB, which at a genuinely pathological 300 GB of writes per day is still about 14 years. Under aggressively pessimistic assumptions, the timeline is measured in years, not three months.

One caution the doom content always skips: the write numbers in Activity Monitor are logical writes from applications. What wears NAND is physical writes, after the controller’s caching, compression, and write amplification. The only honest accounting is the drive’s own SMART data: Percentage Used and Data Units Written.

Install smartmontools via Homebrew and query the internal NVMe device; the exact device name and available fields vary by Mac model and macOS version, so treat it as one method rather than a universal command. It reads counters and changes nothing.

If this arc feels familiar, it should. In 2021, alarming SMART screenshots convinced the internet that M1 Macs were “eating their SSDs”. Even the worst documented cases had consumed a fraction of rated endurance, and the panic deflated on inspection.

The fear was understandable. The mechanism was real. The timeline was wrong.

I expected to find a damaged SSD after my heavy usage, but what I found was a healthy SSD trapped inside an unhealthy software environment.

Which raised the better question: if the drive wasn’t the casualty, what was?

What was actually degrading

Three things break long before NAND does, and heavy agentic work hits all three at once.

Storage headroom. Twenty gigabytes of database, twenty of backup, tens more of snapshots (figures from different users’ machines, not one system), and any one of them on a 256 or 512 GB drive is not wear, it’s confiscation. A chronically full drive degrades everything else: macOS has less room for swap, temp files, and APFS snapshots, and the SSD controller has less spare area for garbage collection and wear-leveling. There’s no magic percentage, but everything downstream worsens as you approach full; 15 to 25% free is a sound operational floor. I was at 9%.

Memory. Leaked or long-lived processes holding tens of gigabytes force the kernel into continuous swapping. Apple Silicon’s fast storage masks it beautifully: the machine stays usable while thrashing, so you never get an obvious warning. But swap is, in Oakley’s assessment, the single worst contributor to SSD writes on a Mac, and it’s where the heat and the sluggishness come from. The exposure is brutally uneven. A 1 TB, 32 GB machine shrugs this off. A 256 GB, 8 GB base model, the machine students and juniors actually buy, absorbs the full cost. The hidden bill lands hardest on the people least equipped to diagnose it.

Stability and time. Crashes mid-agent-run that destroy context. Helpers killed by the OS. The compounding tax of working on a degraded machine. This is what feels like aging. It’s real. It’s just not terminal.

A quick map, because these symptoms get misattributed constantly:

Free space shrinks daily → database, backups, snapshots → check the IDE’s Application Support folder
Memory high after closing windows → long-lived helper processes → Activity Monitor, Memory tab
Sluggish and hot, nothing “running” → swap pressure from leaked memory → memory pressure graph, swap used
Constant disk activity while idle → indexing loops, snapshot churn → Activity Monitor, Disk tab
Actual SSD wear → the drive’s own accounting → SMART, Percentage Used
I had blamed the hardware for a software housekeeping problem. And once I saw it that way, the story stopped being about my laptop.

This should be a product feature, not user maintenance

The pattern has a name: unbounded local state with no retention policy. And the proof that it’s a choice rather than an inevitability is that tools in the same category already handle it differently.

Claude Code accumulates the same class of data. Every session lands as a transcript on disk, stored unencrypted according to “its own documentation”, which also describes a configurable auto-cleanup that deletes session files older than 30 days by default. You can shorten it, extend it, or disable transcript writing entirely. That’s not a free pass, and 30 days of retention is not zero retention, but someone designed the lifecycle and documented it. (I use Claude Code extensively, so I’m not a neutral observer; the comparison here is limited to the retention controls each product documents.)

As of July 2026, the official Cursor responses I could find for the equivalent problem were staff forum posts recommending manual file deletion. When users are performing garbage collection by hand, the product has externalized its memory management onto their hardware.

And storage is the least of it. Those databases and transcripts hold prompts, source-code fragments, project structures, terminal output, and whatever anyone ever pasted into a chat, which in the real world includes credentials and customer data.

Backups can preserve conversations users believe they deleted, and full-disk encryption provides no application-level retention control, no selective deletion, no protection from anything running as the logged-in user. Every developer laptop can quietly become an unmanaged local archive of material the organization assumed was temporary. That side deserves its own investigation; it’s the next article.

The standard worth holding vendors to is short: documented retention defaults, configurable cleanup, visible storage usage inside the product, per-project deletion. A tool that can autonomously create thousands of files should be able to explain, limit, and delete the state it creates. That question belongs on your evaluation checklist next to model quality and price.

What I changed

Everything below maps to a mechanism above. Two rules first: fully quit the IDE before touching anything, and copy any file before you delete it. Expect local chat history to disappear when you clear state. Paths and behavior change between versions.

Long-lived processes → quit properly. Closing the final window doesn’t always terminate the application or its helper processes, so use Cmd+Q when you actually want the IDE to stop, and make a habit of scanning Activity Monitor for helpers that outlived their windows. On my machine, that 27-day process tree was the single clearest signal.

The database → clear retained state, carefully. Prefer whatever vendor-supported cleanup exists in your version. If the only option is manual, as it was in the threads above: quit the app, copy state.vscdb somewhere safe, then delete the backup file and, if necessary, the database itself, accepting that local history goes with it. Don’t hand-edit undocumented tables unless you’re comfortable recovering from corruption, and know that SQLite’s VACUUM only compacts already-freed space; it doesn’t remove data by itself.

Snapshot churn → constrain the indexer. Aggressive .cursorignore and indexing-ignore rules at every project root: node_modules, build output, logs. This attacks the churn at its source instead of mopping it up.

Low headroom → restore it and keep it. 15 to 25% free, always. On a small drive under agentic load, the highest-leverage habit here.

SSD fear → check the drive, not the vibes. SMART wear, monthly. It’s the difference between knowing and doomscrolling.

I won’t stage a dramatic before-and-after screenshot, because the two biggest fixes on my machine are mechanical certainties, not discoveries: fully quitting Cursor releases that 27-day process tree, and a restart lets macOS drain the swap. The lasting work is the habits. And in the spirit of the fairness note above, on my drive, winning back real space means confronting 83 GB of Xcode data before touching anything with “AI” in the name.

The hidden bill

My Mac wasn’t dying. It was drowning in a state that no one, human or agent, had ever been asked to manage.

That’s the honest version of the hidden cost of vibe coding. The agents can plan, scaffold, test, retry, and rewrite an entire application. What they still can’t reliably do is clean up after themselves, and neither, right now, can the products wrapped around them.

The API bill is visible. The hardware bill accumulates in hidden folders.

If you’ve measured your own machine, SMART data before and after a heavy agentic week, database sizes, swap numbers, I’d genuinely like to see it. The field data on this is thin, and it shouldn’t be.